---
layout: post
title:  "How I Do Public Presentations"
author: "Trent Willis"
date:   2018-10-01
image:  "2018-10-01-how-i-talk.jpg"
excerpt: "More advice than you probably want on public presentations."
---

When I was younger, my parents had me participate in a public speaking program through our local [4-H](https://4-h.org/) chapter. I did not really enjoy it.

Several years later, I joined a debate team and had to speak publicly. Again, I did not really enjoy it.

Fast-forward to now and I have willingly chosen to give talks [a good number of events]((/speaking). I can safely say I enjoy public speaking now.

So what changed? Well, for one thing, I realized once you got up there it isn't as bad as you might think. Second, I've learned a lot about how to make it not suck.

## Constructing The Talk

When I start working on a talk, I begin by outlining major sections and rough estimates for how long I plan to spend in each section. For instance, in most 30 minutes presentations, I usually have 5 sections like so:

1. Introduction [3 minutes]
2. Main Point #1 [7 minutes]
3. Main Point #2 [7 minutes]
4. Main Point #3 [7 minutes]
5. Conclusion [3 minutes]

You'll notice I don't plan to use all 30 minutes. I find that I often need to be about 10% under my allotted time to allow for “conversational detours” – little changes that flow naturally while I'm speaking.

### The Introduction

Don’t start by introducing yourself! Start with a story, question, or thought provoking statement to engage
  If a question, make it explicit if you want audience participation
    This sets the tone for future questions as well

### The Main Points

Research your topic thoroughly! You can’t be too much of an expert

### The Conclusion

Your conclusion should callback to your intro
  But the rest can have many different structures
  The important thing is that the transitions are smooth and make sense
    Avoid thought whiplash if possible!
    The outline helps with this
Try to conclude with a call to action or inspirational statement, and not a recap/summary
  “Inspire an action” if doing both

## Practicing The Talk

Once you've contructed your talk, it's time to practice! Seriously, practice, _practice_, **_practice_**!

I firmly believe that

> The first time you give the talk should never actually be the first time you give a talk.

I practice my talks until I’m basically sick of giving the talk and then I get on stage and give the talk one more time.

This helps you stay calm when something goes wrong during your talk

Some folks worry that rehearsing too much can make your talk sound unnatural and to an extent that is true, _but_ it is completely possible to rehearse almost to the point of memorization and have it sound natural! You do this by getting feedback from others

Get some real feedback
  Preferably do this before you’ve “finished” the talk

Practice the feedback you’ve received
  Avoid repetitious rhythms
  For me that means inflection primarily
    And for many others; monotone talks are terrible!
  For many that means “ums” - cache misses
    Speak deliberately, not slowly; and that will help with the ums
Write down all my thoughts; almost word for word, but focus on being conversational as you do it!
  Keep sentences short and not complex
  Find something or someone to talk to
Include actionable points; folks like to be able to do, not just know!
Use the stage! Get comfortable moving but also be careful to not move too much
  I’m guilty of moving too much
  Buy a clicker if possible, or borrow one

## Complementing The Talk

Slides
Software doesn’t matter; use what you like and that is able to help you communicate effectively
  For me that is Keynote
Use animations to help emphasize points, but also to help your audience follow along
Keep designs simple
  Guidelines: one font with two weights, one accent font, two primary colors and two grayscale/neutral colors
But, try to design your slides such that they support the tone of your talk
Include your twitter handler and the conference hashtag (if applicable) on all slides
  Allows folks to join the conversation
Ensure code slides have syntax highlighting
  For more than one line of code, include and arrow or some other indicator of which line you’re discussing
Don’t just put “thank you” on your last slide; leave them with something to tweet
If multi-track, have a title slide up so folks know they’re in the right place
Your title slide doesn’t need to be the first one
Make your slides “visual”; I struggle with this cause it takes more time

Demos
Most of the time, these should probably just be recorded!
If it must be done live, practice it multiple times and avoid the network as much as possible!
Is sound really necessary?
If it’s a multi-part demo, consider using git tags to bail you out of issues

## Giving The Talk

Don’t worry about forgetting a point or not saying something exactly the same; the audience is none the wiser
If someone walks out, assume it’s an emergency or they need to catch a plane or something
If someone is looking at their phone, assume they’re tweeting about your talk
Try to talk to members of the audience before your talk and let them know your speaking and then find them in the audience
  Other speakers are great for this!
Try anxiety breathing exercises, power posing, or actual exercise for nerves
  Also, talk to someone! Makes the y’all feel like an extension of the conversation
I don’t agree with changing your talk content based on what folks say right before
Memorize the beginning of your talk! It’s the hardest part no matter what but it’s also one of the most critical portions for engaging the audience
  Also, memorize your conclusion
Try to have good “eye contact”; you don’t have to make eye contact to have eye contact though
Make friends with other speakers; there’s a special connection and ability to share feedback there
  But don’t spend all your time in the speaker room!

Other
Practice true lightning talks

Make it your own; not all of these points will apply to everyone
You’re there to communicate with the audience; not to perform, recite, get glory, etc.
Enjoy the experience!
You’ll learn more each time :)

Potential reviewers:
Jem Young
Ryan Burgess
Isa Silveria
Aimee Knight
Vaidehi Joshi
Marcy Sutton
